# The 2021 election coverage

What I am planning for election coverage this year is seven straight weeks of hard questions for each of the candidates.

## Aug. 26: Introductions

1. **A photo of yourself.** This preferably will be a standard portrait (from shoulders up). It must be a photo we can use in our ongoing coverage of your campaign. If you do not have a recent photo of yourself, let me know, and we can schedule a time and place for me to get a photo of you.
1. **50 to 100 words about who you are.** This should include information about your current occupation, your involvement with public boards and local politics, how long you have lived in Moab, and where (roughly) you live in the city.

## Sept. 2: Housing

For the city council candidates:

1. According to experts in housing policy, the greatest opportunity Moab has to decrease housing costs is to reform its zoning to allow construction of more and different kinds of low- and middle-income housing. **How will you overcome the neighborhood defending (or NIMBYism) that plagues efforts to reform the city's zoning?**
1. Another force driving up housing costs in Moab is demand from second homeowners. **Should Moab allow more housing development to complement the demand from second homeowners? If not, how would you privilege full-time locals in the local housing market?**

For the mayoral candidates:

1. States like Oregon have successfully reduced barriers to housing construction by taking away the ability of local governments to restrict housing. **What local control would you be willing to give up to the State of Utah in exchange for lower barriers to housing development?**
1. In most of Moab's residential zones, triplexes, four-plexes, and apartment buildings are illegal. In many areas within city limits, only single-family homes are legal. **Should Moab legalize high-density housing in more areas of the city? If so, where?**

## Sept. 9: Tourism

## Sept. 16: Growth

## Sept. 23: Transportation

## Sept. 30: Budget priorities

## Oct. 7: Placeholder

## Oct. 14: Housing

## Oct. 21: Voter guide

## Oct. 28: Something creative

## Nov. 4: Results and reminders
