# Pack Creek Fire still not growing

## 85% containment; personnel down to 55

The Pack Creek Fire remained at 8,952 acres as of Wednesday morning, June 30, and was at 85% containment. Light rains over most of the fire area helped decrease fire activity and integrate ash into the soil. Humidity, wind, and moisture are expected through the rest of the week.

Firefighters continue monitoring the fire, looking for hotspots along the perimeter, addressing hazards, and completing rehabilitation work. Fire behavior is expected to remain minimal.

Even though fire activity is minimal, the fire is still burning in the interior and, as conditions dry out, Moab residents and visitors may continue to see smoke throughout the summer.

The Temporary Flight Restriction has been updated to be a five mile radius over the fire. Unauthorized use of aircraft including drones in a flight restriction area is illegal and a safety risk for firefighters and pilots.

Evacuations are still in place for the Holyoak and Dark Canyon areas. The La Sal Loop Road is now open, but Geyser Pass and Oowah Lake Roads are closed. The Warner Lake and Oowah Lake campgrounds remain closed.

The Manti La Sal National Forest updated the closure order for the La Sal Mountains on June 24. The updated closure is still in effect, but as people begin to re-enter the area, incident managers implore that they look out for fallen trees, uneven ground, reduced visibility from dust or smoke, firefighting personnel who continue to work in the area, and other hazards.

The public should expect trail and recreation site closures to continue due to risks from falling trees and/or potential flooding. [Closure information can be found online.](https://bit.ly/3h7ixYM)
 
Investigators are still seeking leads to help identify those responsible for the fire’s ignition. Anyone who has information related to the identification of the responsible party of the Pack Creek Fire can call the tip line at [775-355-5337](tel:775-355-5337).

As of June 25, public and state lands are in stage 2 fire restrictions in Carbon, Emery, Grand and San Juan counties. Stage 2 restrictions mean campfires are not allowed on public or state lands. See related story for details.

[*Source: Pack Creek fire incident management team*]({% include asset_path file_name="Pack Creek Fire Fact Sheet June 30.pdf" %})
