# County prevails against homebuilders

## Independent officer adds to restrictions, further undermining housing projects

When Grand County officials learned in {% draft "month" %} that a local homebuilder was looking outside the valley for the money needed to enable new housing, it set in motion a series of decisions that eventually led to the project getting kneecapped.

Courtney Kizer, a local homebuilder, and her husband Steve Evers wanted to build condominiums along Murphy Lane — a kind of project that allows a homebuyer to purchase just the building but not the land, resulting in a much more attainable investment for locals than typical housing.

Typically, a homebuyer must bear the cost of both the home they are buying and the land where it sits. Condominiums allow a homebuyer to cut their costs roughly in half by finding someone with whom to share the cost to invest in the land while the homebuyer invests in the building.

In many cases, condos are targeted to middle- to low-income buyers, and that was the vision Kizer and Evers had. As they began pursuing the project, they did not see enough interested money in Moab to make that happen.

In other words, they could only attain their vision for Murphy Flats by expanding their lens outside the county. If an investor from Salt Lake City wants to buy into the project and sell the buildings to local homeowners, how is that any different than a local investor doing the same thing?

For Kizer and Evers, there was no meaningful difference. Investors are investors, regardless where from, they said. For county officials, the distinction was vital.

After learning of Kizer's and Evers's intentions, county officials got to work finding a way to change the project and clarifying (homebuilders say changing) the underlying rule: the High-Density Housing Overlay ordinance.

Many of the officials had no involvement in the development of the HDHO; the authors had moved on to new jobs after receiving awards for the design of and coalition-building behind the ordinance, and the elected body that ultimately makes decisions on the matter had also changed considerably.

The staff and elected officials who took over in their stead determined that the High-Density Housing Overlay would be too difficult to enforce if Kizer and Evers got their way. Their idea of selling to investors elsewhere in the state or even country also left a bad taste in their mouths. Were the units not intended to be for locals only?

Everyone agreed that they were only for locals. The units were intended to create a market for housing in which only locals could participate. What exactly that meant, it turned out, was divisive.

The disagreement ultimately came down to whether the HDHO limited who could own the units or limited who could live in them. Developers and the authors of the ordinance said that it was about who could live in them.

County officials instead voted to make it about who could own them.

When faced with pushback from the HDHO homebuilders, county officials recommended an alternative path. They could pursue investments from local businesses and nonprofits instead, or they could take a less traditional path of having outside investors buy a stake in the homebuilder's company to raise the necessary capital.

It wasn’t that a business couldn’t provide the financial capital for the projects; it was that the businesses had to be local, they said.

Kizer, Evers and others maintained that there was not enough interested money in Moab to make the projects work.

When the dispute went to hearing officer Bruce Jenkins, a {% draft "something" %} lawyer based in St. George, he decided that the county was right about the key issue at hand. He also went a few steps beyond.

Jenkins said that not only is the ordinance about who can own HDHO units, but the ordinance also prevents local nonprofits and businesses from purchasing the units. In other words, the alternative pathway offered by the county was nonviable.

The decision is the nail in the coffin for Kizer's vision.

"Thats a wrap on Murphy \[Flats\] as a condo project," she said the morning Jenkins ruled. "We are not planning to appeal the decision but will instead just move on with our lives."

To cut her losses, Kizer is pivoting to rental housing. It will change the project from a wealth-building opportunity for low- to middle-income individuals into a rent-collecting opportunity for middle- to high-income locals wealthy enough to afford to take on such a project, but it will satisfy the letter of the law.

"There are still investors interested in joining in with us on the project, but all want the project as a rental property," Kizer said.

Although the new project will satisfy the need for the projects to be locally owned, the people Kizer thought could purchase the units are no longer eligible. No outside investor is allowed to purchase the project, and no local investors want to back condominiums.

Instead, the only investors now allowed to purchase the project have a vision that differs from the homebuilders who planned the project. They don’t want condos; they wants rentals.
