---
published: false
---

# The U of U housing survey; local party officers; and more

## HDHO

This disagreement over occupancy versus ownership is not a longstanding impasse — at least, not according to public records and meetings. It is a recent development in the HDHO saga.
The conflict came up in {% draft "January" %}, when the developer of Murphy Flats went to market with pre-sales of homes. County officials and the Murphy Flats developers said that, as potential buyers came forward with questions about eligibility, developers referred them to county staff.
The county provided answers that brought unwelcome news to developers. County staffers said that part of the plan for Murphy Flats — the part about selling to outside investors — would violate the ordinance that the developers thought they were following.
Within weeks, the county commission passed rules that they say clarify how the HDHO works. Developers say it is a change to the rules. A third party is now reviewing them, at the request of developers.
Will this help anything?
Prior to the collapse into argumentation over who was and was not allowed to buy HDHO units, the ordinance appeared to be on its way to success. It added over 300 new housing units to the planning pipeline, with {% draft "something" %} of those units already built, according to Grand County Attorney Christina Sloan.
Plans to build housing don’t always turn into actual housing, but after fallout over Murphy Flats and amid ongoing appeals, the potential impact of the ordinance is even less clear.
Backers of the ownership argument make 
Three developers, accounting for {more than} half the pending units, have initiated a review of the rules.
Those rules put the disagreement between current commissioners and developers into writing. On one side, the developers say that anyone is (and should be) allowed to buy HDHO units, as long as the person living in the units are locals. On the other side, the Grand County Commission says that only locals can purchase HDHO units.
On the side of developers are former county staffers who drafted the HDHO and three of the six council members who voted for its passage. On the side of the Grand County Commission are the other three council members.

## Grand County Dems, GOPers elect their party officers

435-220-0747 --- Cricket Green

## Weed board wins a major award

You have to read that header in the voice of the dad from *A Christmas Story*.
