# Moab's housing crisis in four key figures

## Earn $4,940 more per month to own a home

In 2019, the typical household wage in Moab was $4,940 less than it needed to be for the household to afford to own the typical Moab home. That is up over $1,000 in the last 10 years; in 2009, the gap was $3,100, according to data from the Moab Area Housing Task Force.

Rent costs are also high in Moab. According to a 2018 report from the Utah Department of Work Services, Grand County had the largest gap of any county between the cost of renting a typical apartment and the typical local wage.

A 2019 update from the Moab Area Housing Task Force showed that the typical Moabite would need to make $1,294 more each month to afford the area’s typical rent, utilities, and renter's insurance.

## One home per 1,800 square feet

Unless granted special permission by the community at large, homebuilders in Moab cannot build more than one housing unit per 1,800 square feet. That is in the relatively small R-4 Manufactured Housing Residential Zone.

In much of the city's residential areas, the maximum density is one home per 3,000 square feet, and the maximum in the R-3 Multi-Household Residential Zone is one unit per 2,000 square feet.

The average size of a new apartment completed in 2018 in the U.S. was 941 square feet according to RENTCafé, a nationwide apartment listing service. The average for Western states was around 840 square feet.

That means, in the city's zone designated for multifamily housing, an average-sized Western apartment unit would need to come with roughly 1,200 square feet of open space.

The RENTCafé analysis showed that new apartments in the U.S. got 5% smaller from 2008 to 2018. Studio apartments shrunk most drastically and were 514 square feet in size on average when built in 2018. Even smaller apartments exist around the U.S. and the world.

"In a 300-square-foot micro apartment, roughly 60 square feet will be kitchen area, and about 30 square feet will be the bathroom," reads a blog post from Apartments.com. "That leaves only 210 square feet, roughly the size of a one-car garage, of living space (minus the closet, if there is one)."

## High-density housing prioritized on 6.5% of the land

In the City of Moab, the objective of the R-3 zone, named the Multi-Household Residential Zone, is "to provide appropriate locations within the city for high-density, residential development." The zone accounts for 6.5% of the land within city limits.

High-density, residential developments are allowed in other parts of the city, as well, including commercial zones. However, developers do not tend to build housing in commercial zones. This is because business construction tends to be more profitable per square foot, so it outcompetes housing in those areas.

The zones within city limits where housing is prioritized are R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MH/RV-1, and RA-1. Each of the zones prioritizes different kinds of housing.

The largest of these zones by area is R-2, which prioritizes single- and two-household structures, including duplexes. R-2 comprises 37% of the total residential zoning in Moab. R-3 comprises 11% of the residential zoning.

Higher-density housing is also allowed in the R-4 zone, though manufactured houses (like those in Grand Oasis) are prioritized. R-4 comprises 20% of the total residential zoning in Moab.

The remaining three zones support only single-family, detached housing in various forms. They take up the remaining 32% of the city's residential zoning.

## A 5-point decrease in multifamily unit approvals

In Utah, 27% of housing units permitted for construction between 2000 and 2009 were in multi-family developments. Between 2010 and 2019, that figure increased to 44%.

In Moab, the opposite trend took hold. From 2000 to 2009, 33% of residential units approved for consruction in Grand County were multifamily units. From 2010 to 2017 (data is missing from 2018 and parts of 2019), the figure was 28% --- a decrease of five percentage points.
