# Grand County needs fact checking on the High-Density Housing Overlay.

I took notes yesterday on the key claims made during the commission's discussion of the High-Density Housing Overlay. A lot of what Grand County Attorney Christina Sloan said during the meeting was false or misleading. Some of what the commissioners said was the same way. The previous meeting had more aggregious offenses in this respect.

I want to follow up with a fact checking article that drills down on what Sloan, the commissioners, the developers and others have said about the HDHO to demonstrate that the county has a lot of what it is saying and doing wrong.

One quick example is that Grand County Commissioner Kevin Walker proposed during this week's meeting that developers interested in creating remntal housing simply seek outside investment to buy into their partnerships or corporations.

I was a bit baffled by this suggestion when he made it. Does he think this wasn't already a consideration developers made? Does he think this would have any effect different from allowing the outside investors to buy directly?

I even asked a developer a few weeks ago about this prospect. Here's what Cortney Kizer, owner of the Murphy Flats development, said:

{% capture quote %}
This is actually where we started about on our project - we intended for it to be an all rental property with some help from outside financiers. We had several investors interested but they wanted massive % ownership on the project. We decided this was not the best route for us and more importantly for our community as we would lose the ability to make decisions that we know are right for Moab locals.

Instead, we decided that condominiumizing would allow for local ownership as well and keep a larger percent of the project in Moab hands. (It is certainly possible that the large investors we would team up with would turn out to be great, who knows!)

This may be a route we end up needing to take if the rules and regulations are passed. It is higher on the priority list than single family development if at all possible and if we can find interested investors after all of this mess. 
{% endcapture %}

{% include authoring/attributed_quote.html
    quote = quote
    by =    "Courtney Kizer, Moab developer approved for HDHO; Feb. 15, 2021"
%}

I have not yet called Walker to hash out this apparent misunderstanding.

Somewhat related, here is a video of the public hearing regarding applying the HDHO to the Murphy Flats property: [Applying HDHO to Murphy Flats expansion](https://youtu.be/CqkoGFEcRHo?t=16500).

The video is actually the second time the couple went before the Grand County Council for HDHO approval; they had previously received approval for a smaller development under the plan and went back for seconds.
