# No news, just programming

I spent the day overhauling the plugins that I use with the site. Once I get all of that done, I should have an easier time tweaking website functionality, not just its look and content.

The goal is to do the following:

{% raw %}
1. **Provide a way to show the last time a story was modified.** This will create some transparency around when a story gets edited, how, and why. It does so without me needing to do any work besides programming the plugin and editing stories as necessary.
1. **Improve the way in which assets (primarily images) are included in stories.** This will solve a problem that I have on [my own website](https://carterpape.com), where the images are so big (because I like to hold on to the original quality ones) that it makes pages load slowly. I can just drop in full-quality images, and the computer down-sizes them while maintaining and not touching the original.
1. **Make naming posts easier.** I usually don't come up with the name of a post until it's done because sometimes I include multiple stories and sometimes I include one. Plus, I try to avoid coming up with headlines for stories until I have finished writing the story. This plugin will allow me to use placeholder names and automatically rename as I am about to publish the story.
1. **Make listing documents easier.** I am supposed to get a request to my GRAMA request for HDHO-related emails next week. I want to organize those into folders with dates to make it a little easier to read through them. It would be nice to have a way to automatically list and link to files associated with a post so I don't have to list them all by hand.
1. **Support logical plugin notation.** This is in the weeds, but I basically need to have a way to parse Liquid tags in a logical way. I want named arguments with plugins, and they are all going to follow the formula of `{% plugin_tag arg1="a string literal" arg2='another literal' arg3='420.69' arg4=variable %}`.
{% endraw %}

Easy.
