# Synergy has a new CEO

The Synergy Company recently announced the appointment of longtime Moab resident Thatcher Vagts as its next Chief Executive Officer, a promotion of a longtime employee known for his focus on corporate responsibility and local philanthropy.

Founded in 1992, The Synergy Company is a Moab-based producer of dietary supplements. The company is occasionally cited by local officials as a symbol of economic diversification in Grand County, which is seeking to grow local businesses of all industries, not just tourism.

Zacharia Levine, Synergy's director of corporate development and social responsibility, said that Vagts has been "instrumental in formalizing Synergy’s robust community outreach program, which contributed more than $100,000 to local non-profit organizations in 2020."

Moab Regional Hospital CEO Jen Sadoff said Vagts has been "extremely supportive" of the hospital throughout the pandemic, donating personal protective equipment and Thanksgiving meals for employees working on the holiday.

"I am grateful that one of the largest anchor businesses in our community will be led by an individual with deep roots in Moab and a strong commitment to the community," Sadoff said of Vagts.

Outside Synergy, Vagts has worked for the Youth Garden Project, Tex’s Riverways, and Aspen Achievement Academy. He also served as a board member for Moonflower Market, which carries the Pure Synergy line of products.

Mitchell May, founder and owner, The Synergy Company, said that Vagts's appointment "extends a long arc of The Synergy Company emphasizing best-in-class quality and long-term value." He also said that Vagts has his "full trust and confidence in leading our company into the future."

For his own part, Vagts said he was "deeply inspired" by the commitment of Mitchell May and his wife Jayne May "to community and the betterment of our employees."

"It is an honor to help carry forward their legacy," Vagts said. "Through the hard work, dedication, and creativity of our team, I have confidence The Synergy Company will remain a powerful force for good in Moab and the world."
