---
categories: election-2021
---

# Election 2021: Water

Moab residents and officials often cite concerns with water availability in the valley when it comes to discussions about the city’s potential for growth. Since 2019, those concerns have been most prominent in discussions about increasing visitation in Moab.

However, [as of June 2019](https://moabcity.org/DocumentCenter/View/3155/Moab-Water-Facts-2019?bidId=), 50% of Moab’s municipal water was used by residents, and 16% of its water went to overnight accommodations, according to the City of Moab.

Estimates from the city also published June 2019 indicate that current groundwater use across the entire valley is 9,100 acre-feet per year. The city also estimated the groundwater production potential across the entire valley collectively to be 15,800 acre-feet annually. The two together mean that the valley was collectively using around 60% of its water use potential, according to estimates by the city.

The figure is [corroborated by more recent estimates](https://www.moabtimes.com/articles/state-moab-could-safely-use-more-water/) from the state engineer that Moab could use 50-100% more water than it currently does without exceeding the valley’s safe yield.

According to [the city’s draft Water Conservation Plan Update for 2021](https://moabcity.org/DocumentCenter/View/3307/01-Water-Conservation-Plan-Update-2021-DRAFT?bidId=), total water use in the valley has trended slightly down since 2005 even as population and visitation have grown. Water usage per capita has also trended down since 2005, according to the update.

Before the 2021 update, [the city’s 2016 water conservation plan](https://moabcity.org/DocumentCenter/View/3134/Moab-Water-Conservation-Plan-Update-2016-FINAL) indicated that the city could more than double its population before using as much water as was believed to be available in the valley. And before that, the 2010 conservation report also found that the city could double its population before needing to find new sources of water.

The city’s stated goal is to reduce per capita water usage from 280 gallons per day per capita last year to 230 gallons per day per capita in 2030.

As for the longer term, there are many more factors to consider. For many, climate change is the primary example of such a factor.

[Estimates from NASA made in 2013](https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/details.cgi?aid=4028) suggested that southeastern Utah would see a reduction in total annual rainfall between 0 and 10% by the year 2084. However, the precipitation estimates do not directly translate into how much water Moab will have available to use in the long-term.

Factors such as increased storm severity and increased evapotranspiration (both proven consequences in the West of climate change) mean that less precipitation will infiltrate the valley’s groundwater systems.

As for water policy, The Salt Lake Tribune [recently published a story](https://www.sltrib.com/news/2021/09/20/utah-residents-use-most/) in which various experts criticized the low rates Utahns pay for water — particularly, what they pay for excessive water use — and suggested that increasing the cost of using lots of water would reduce water usage.

With all of this in mind, The Times-Independent asked the candidates for mayor of Moab the following set of questions:

First, how much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

Second, to meet the city’s water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

Each candidate left in the race answered, except Sherri Costanza. The newspaper is publishing their answers to only the first set of questions in the print edition, due to space constraints. The answers to both questions are available online at moabtimes.com

Here’s what each candidate said, edited for clarity:

### Joette Langianese

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> I am concerned that Moab and Spanish Valley are at a high risk of overdrawing from its aquifer in the next 10 years. Several studies indicate that the aquifer does not have as much water as previously thought.
>
> Combined with the long-term drought we are currently facing and our desert climate, it seems prudent to be conservative when it comes to water usage in Moab and in the alley. Water is a finite resource that comes from recharge from the La Sal mountains. In my view, water availability will be a top priority for the city.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> As Mayor, I will discuss with the city council and staff the development of a conservation plan that focuses on the worst case scenario of running out of water to meet the needs of the community.
>
> The city needs to work closely with the county to develop a plan that prioritizes who will be first in line to receive water and what those impacts will be on future developments and the tourist economy.
>
> It is my opinion that residents should come first when there is not enough water to meet the demands.

### Bill Winfield

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> As a desert town in a drying West, we must plan cautiously to protect our environment and ensure continued water supply.
>
> On this front, Moab is doing well. As the city’s water conservation plans make clear, sustainable growth will not overdraw our aquifer.
>
> Moab’s total water consumption has fallen 9% over the last decade and 30% over the last 20 years. It demonstrates we can save water while meeting our critical housing needs so that Moab can continue to be a place where future generations can afford to call home.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> I see no immediate need to increase the base price of water on residents. In the future, it’s worth considering a scaled approach to reduce instances of excessive water consumption and incentivize additional conservation measures.
>
> According to [the Sept. 20 report](https://www.sltrib.com/news/2021/09/20/utah-residents-use-most/) from *The Salt Lake Tribune*, Moab’s water is among the cheapest in the state, and Utah’s is the cheapest in the nation. So, we have the ability to conserve more water as future supply constraints and conservation goals require.

### Stephen J. Stocks

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> When deciding water policy impact on development and sustainability, the next 10 years are critical.
>
> Currently, the Colorado River cannot consistently meet current growth rates. Regardless from which perspective we view this issue, we understand that water is invaluable. We must educate ourselves about the issue and act accordingly.
>
> As mayor, I would encourage that research and bring all interested parties to discuss it. Then, as a community, we should decide how to proceed: Carefully with the water we think we have, implementing reasonable conservation efforts and sustainable growth? Or use it for short-term gain, and hope it works out?

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> Water is a critical issue facing our community. Perhaps not in the short-term, but what we decide today will determine whether Moab has the water it will need in the not-too-distant future.
>
> The City Council, not the mayor, creates policy. As mayor, I would work closely with council and staff to ensure we access the best scientific data available.
>
> I would reach out to all facets of our community, including business and agriculture to discuss the reality of water availability and usage in a desert setting experiencing long-term and worsening drought conditions.

### Aaron Davies

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> Based on the information given, it appears our efforts to reduce water consumption has had some success. I would work to continue these efforts.
>
> I believe that responding out of fear is not called for. I believe that as humans, we all have the responsibility to be good stewards of our environment. This begins with our fellow human beings and continues on to include water.
>
> We need to be wise about how we plan for the future growth of our community. Good management of our resources will enable us to handle the growth that is inevitable.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> I will learn the details of the current water policy and get more information from the city staff to learn what they have already learned.
>
> Working with the people already working on this, I will empower them to continue to find creative ways to stay on track. Through continual monitoring, we will determine if goals or policies need to be changed.
>
> Taking care of our water is the responsibility of the entire community. As we focus on our individual similarities not our differences we will have multiplied energy and vision to find answers to our challenges.

### Kent Green

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> After reading the information provided to me, I currently do not see a high risk in overdrawing from our aquifers. The studies prove it.
>
> But, that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t take the possibility of it into consideration when planning for future businesses and a possible resurgence of industry in the county. We should definitely be proactive in protecting our source, so our future residents don’t have to be reactive to a mismanaged aquifer.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> We are already trending down for usage of water in the city, so there would be no reason to implement a new plan. At the end of the day, people know when they are being wasteful.
>
> We should continue to encourage locals and visitors to be mindful when using our water and that would be the best way to manage our usage.

### Josie Kovash

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> It’s complicated, and information is incomplete and variable.
>
> Data suggests a range of possibilities for safe yield (what is rechargeable, rather than just available, in our aquifer), the lower end being close to current usage. Worst-case scenario is we are already at safe yield. Best case is that we are halfway there.
>
> I think it’s prudent to base water policy on conservative estimates rather than gamble on optimism. If we overdraw, we can’t just put it back.
>
> Moab has an amazing scientific community to guide us on this issue. Those I have talked to urge caution and continued study.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> In addition to strict standards for new development, we should move toward higher rates for water usage (the stick) while providing resources for residents to  transition to more water wise properties (the carrot). Cities like Tucson are good role models.
>
> We also shouldn’t let water conservation green light unchecked expansion. Any future city build out we can safely manage needs to benefit locals first: housing, economic diversification, and green infrastructure.
>
> Finally, we shouldn’t bank on supplementing with Colorado River water, a move I believe to be both untenable and unethical. Let’s shape our community within the realistic confines of our aquifer.

### Jason Taylor

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> Looking at current and projected growth rates for the next 10 years, studies show that Moab will likely not overdraw the aquifer in that time.
>
> Moab has made some great strides in reducing water use, actually using less than five years ago. We need to continue to watch our water usage, especially with the expansion of Spanish Valley and San Juan County.
>
> This outlook could also change if drought conditions continue here in the Southwest. While the next 10 years look sustainable, we should also be planning for the next 50 years of water use.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> To meet the city's conservation goals, I would really like to see a coalition formed between the City of Moab, Grand County, and San Juan County where all water users are working together to create water conservation policies.
>
> I would like to see ways to encourage new construction to install gray water retention systems for landscape watering.
>
> I would also work toward a policy of prohibiting using water from the aquifer for projects such as construction or dust control and instead creating a pump station where we can draw from the water rights Moab City has on the Colorado River for these purposes.

### Anthony Charles

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> We cannot save water just to let low paying jobs come in. We need year-round business that will be responsible and effective in how they run their business, understanding that we’re in a desert, and we are (or at least I am) saving water for my son, for my grandchildren and great grandchildren and great great great etc. grandchildren.
>
> I made some phone calls and did some research and found out that San Juan and Grand have water rights to the Colorado River, and there is something great starting to happen!

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> There are better ways to save water, like all tourism-based companies adding a low-flow water filter that you place just behind the shower head. It’s about $3. We also need to help people replace their old drip lines.
>
> We can create 40 or more jobs with my ideas, like building a road to Hell’s Revenge off Highway 128 and having a $25, multi-day pass.
>
> Let’s say if we only need $10 to maintain the new road; the other $15 would be donations to local nonprofits. Each month, we change the beneficiary so all can benefit. It’s not rocket science!

### Randall Fox

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> Assuming the figures listed are indeed accurate, I’d say that Moab appears to be safe for the next decade.
>
> But, all of this talk about potential growth brings us right back to the lack of affordable housing for those who wish to contribute to our economy right now. Let’s focus on convenient and predictable housing for seasonal workers and low-income housing for some of our families first.
>
> Once everyone is safe and secure, we can look to strategically grow as it fits our future plans.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> We certainly need to tighten up on our wasteful water usage.
>
> A property near me waters a strip of decorative grass daily. There is so much runoff that the stream travels down the street and through an intersection.
>
> I recently came across a worker rinsing out parking spaces at the library when a shovel, wheelbarrow, and broom would have been faster and much less wasteful.
>
> Rain in the desert is a sacred event partly because it's rare. Water in our aquifer is like money in the bank for those innumerable non-rainy days.

### Luke Wojciechowski

How much risk do you believe Moab faces of overdrawing its aquifer in the next 10 years? Why?

> Water is our most limited resource, and a big factor in long-term planning and development in Grand County.
>
> The estimates mentioned above should be viewed cautiously, and newer data shows that we’re actually at significantly lower annual water recharge to our aquifers than estimated even a year ago.
>
> As someone who has experience managing funding and budgets, I view water use the same way: you can’t allocate more than you actually have, and you make plans based on certainties, not speculation. I think our water policy has to be cautious, because like finances, if we overdraw our aquifer, that’s it.

To meet the city's water conservation goals, what policies will you implement to reduce per capita water usage in Moab? Or, would you set less ambitious goals?

> It is a no-brainer to tighten up standards for new development. We cannot continue to grow in ways that do not take our most irreplaceable resource into account.
>
> The city can also do more to encourage water-wise practices for existing households and businesses through incentives and retrofitting programs.
>
> Doing what we can today to conserve our local water supply is smart, no matter what the outlook is for aquifer longevity. Protecting the health and safety of our residents includes making sure we have water to drink and grow our food if we hope to keep calling the Moab Valley home.
